Final Kafka Tutorial (#109)
otterize/docs: docs/quick-tutorials/k8s-kafka-mtls.mdx

In this tutorial, we will:

- Deploy a Kafka broker with 2 topics, and two clients that call these topics.
- Protect just 1 of those topics with Otterize. See that access to that topic is blocked.
- Declare that one client pod intends to access that protected topic.
- See that an ACL was autogenerated to allow just that, while blocking calls to that topic from the other client.

> - Also verify that mTLS credentials were autogenerated for all clients.

Reviewer: I didn't see the part where we verify the credentials were generated, except for referring to a UI indication just before turning on protection

Reviewer 2: I think we can remove this bit from the tutorial entirely, I believe it's pretty self-explanatory. We do explain that it goes in a Kubernetes Secret, that's enough IMO.

> - Also verify that mTLS credentials were autogenerated for all clients.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: I think we can remove this bit from the tutorial entirely, I believe it's pretty self-explanatory. We do explain that it goes in a Kubernetes Secret, that's enough IMO.

</Tabs>
</details>

We've chosen to allow unauthenticated access to both topics to begin with. Initially, we're not requiring declared intents so everything is open here. This will be the base state, from which we can gradually secure access to specific topics.

## Deploy clients

Our simple example consists of two client pods:
- One named "**client**".
- And one named "**client-other**".

> These clients will eventually authenticate to Kafka using mTLS, but we haven't turned that on just yet. Otterize makes this easy, requiring just 3 simple changes to the client pod spec:

Reviewer: The clients are authenticating to Kafka with mTLS already at this point as we aren't using a plaintext connection here. It's just that this isn't required by Kafka. There's no need to switch from plaintext to SSL just to show this, but just update how we phrase this.

> These clients will eventually authenticate to Kafka using mTLS, but we haven't turned that on just yet. Otterize makes this easy, requiring just 3 simple changes to the client pod spec:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These clients are connecting to Kafka using mTLS, the credentials for which they will receive from Otterize. Otterize makes this easy, requiring just 3 simple changes to the client pod spec:
```

```
This client should be able to access both topics:
```
[client] Loading mTLS certificates
[client] Connecting to Kafka
[client] Creating a producer and a consumer for - mytopic
[client] Sending Messages
[debug]  [client] Sent message 1 [mytopic]
[client] Creating a producer and a consumer for - transactions
[client] Sending messages
[debug]  [client] Sent message 1 [transactions]
[client] Sent message to topic: transactions - [client] Sent message 1 [transactions]
[client] Sent message to topic: mytopic - [client] Sent message 1 [mytopic]
[client] Read message from topic: mytopic - [client-other] Sent message 27 [mytopic]
[client] Read message from topic: mytopic - [client-other] Sent message 18 [mytopic]
[client] Read message from topic: mytopic - [client] Sent message 2 [mytopic]
[client] Read message from topic: mytopic - [client-other] Sent message 36 [mytopic]
[client] Read message from topic: mytopic - [client-other] Sent message 6 [mytopic]
[client] Read message from topic: mytopic - [client-other] Sent message 33 [mytopic]
[client] Read message from topic: mytopic - [client-other] Sent message 19 [mytopic]
```

> As you can see, both `client` and `client-other` are currently able to access both `mytopic` and `transactions` topics.

Reviewer 2: This appears to need moving a few lines below, to after we tail the logs for client-other.

3. **Open another terminal window [client-other]** and tail the client-other log:
```bash
kubectl logs -f --tail 1 -n otterize-tutorial-kafka-mtls deploy/client-other
```
This other client should also be able to access both topics:
```
[client-other] Loading mTLS certificates
[client-other] Connecting to Kafka
[client-other] Creating a producer and a consumer for - mytopic
[client-other] Sending messages
[client-other] Creating a producer and a consumer for - transactions
[client-other] Sending messages
[debug]  [client-other] Sent message 1 [mytopic]
[debug]  [client-other] Sent message 1 [transactions]
[client-other] Sent message to topic: transactions - [client-other] Sent message 1 [transactions]
[client-other] Sent message to topic: mytopic - [client-other] Sent message 1 [mytopic]
[client-other] Read message from topic: transactions - [client] Sent message 5 [transactions]
```

If you've attached Otterize OSS to Otterize Cloud, you can now browse to your account at [https://app.otterize.com](https://app.otterize.com) and see the access graph for your cluster:

> ![Access graph](/img/quick-tutorials/k8s-kafka-mtls/base.png)

Reviewer: This image shows Otterize with enforcement=true but at this state we should have shadow mode (enforcement=false)

> You can see from the Access Graph that no clients are currently blocked because we haven't enabled any sort of enforcement yet.

Reviewer 2: Two changes: Access Graph -> access graph (style guide).
And explain what you see:

> You can see from the Access Graph that no clients are currently blocked because we haven't enabled any sort of enforcement yet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The access graph shows, through its green lines linking the services, that no clients are currently blocked because we haven't enabled any sort of enforcement yet.
```

<details>
<summary>Why do I see eight services?</summary>

> In addition to the Kafka service and the 3 clients we deployed (yes, we snuck a 3rd client in there), the network mapper also picked up the calls between the intents operator and Kafka, and between Kafka and zookeeper, so those discovered intents are reflected in the access graph (in light blue).

Reviewer 2: I think we may no longer need the 3rd client, so how about we remove it and then we can remove this comment?

Author: Removed that reference and decremented the number of services we see.

```

```
[client-authenticated] Loading mTLS certificates
[client-authenticated] Connecting to Kafka
[client-authenticated] Creating a producer and a consumer for - mytopic
[client-authenticated] Sending messages
[client-authenticated] Creating a producer and a consumer for - transactions
[client-authenticated] Sending messages
[debug: client-authenticated] Sent message to [mytopic] - [client-authenticated] Sent message 1
[debug: client-authenticated] Sent message to [transactions] - [client-authenticated] Sent message 1

```

</details>

## Require authentication

This is our first step in protecting our Kafka service. Since we have configured the client processes to generate and mount an mTLS certificate we can safely turn on the `clientIdentityRequired: true` flag in our `kafkaserverconfig.yaml` file.

<details>

> <summary>Turn on tLS authentication</summary>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<summary>Turn on TLS authentication</summary>
```

> <summary>Turn on tLS authentication</summary>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<summary>See changes needed to enable clientIdentityRequired</summary>
```
I'd also remove the collapsible so it just shows, and make it highlight the changed lines for clarity.

<Tabs>

<TabItem value="kafkaserverconfig-auth.yaml" label="kafkaserverconfig-auth.yaml" default>

```yaml
{@include: ../../static/code-examples/kafka-mtls/kafkaserverconfig-auth.yaml}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

</details>

We've provided you with a `kafkaserverconfig.yaml` file with the `clientIdentityRequired` flag enabled, so you can apply that now:

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://docs.otterize.com/code-examples/kafka-mtls/kafkaserverconfig-auth.yaml
```

> If you go back to your access graph and click on your Kafka broker you can see that authorization is now required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you go back to your access graph and click on your Kafka broker you can see that authentication is now required.
```

:::

We can apply intents for the `client` by applying the `client-intents.yaml` file:

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://docs.otterize.com/code-examples/kafka-mtls/client-intents.yaml
```

If you go back to your access graph, you'll now see that the `client` has a solid green arrow connecting it to the Kafka broker. This is because the `client` has both declared its intent to access the Kafka broker, and it has been authenticated using mTLS.

If you click on that solid line, you will see that the declared intents match the discovered intents, so access is assured.

![client intents applied](../../static/img/quick-tutorials/k8s-kafka-mtls/client-intents.png)

2. At this point, since the Kafka server is not actually protected, the `client-other` can still access the topics. The line is dashed, not solid, indicating that it has no declared intents.

![Declared Intent](../../static/img/quick-tutorials/k8s-kafka-mtls/declared-intent.png)

3. Now let's make a change to the `kafkaserverconfig` to require intents for the 2 topics.

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://docs.otterize.com/code-examples/kafka-mtls/kafkaserverconfig-protect.yaml
```

<details>

> <summary>Expand to see kafkaserverconfig-protect</summary>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<summary>See changes needed to enable intentsRequired</summary>
```
And once more I would do it expanded - with no collapsible, and highlight the changed lines.

Author: This whole section is no longer required, since we started off with `true` `true` so I'm deleteing it all.

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="kafkaserverconfig-protect.yaml" label="kafkaserverconfig-protect.yaml" default>

```yaml
{@include: ../../static/code-examples/kafka-mtls/kafkaserverconfig-protect.yaml}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

</details>

> Keep an eye on your Otterize Cloud access graph as you do this, as the 2 clients *without* declared intents should turn orange indicating that, if enforcement were turned on, they would be blocked. This is because we changed the KafkaServerConfig to require intents for those topics with `intentRequired: true`:

Reviewer: We aren't running in shadow enforcement at this point when following the OSS installation instructions

Reviewer 2: Let's change the instructions so we start in shadow mode

![Blocked Without Intent](../../static/img/quick-tutorials/k8s-kafka-mtls/blocked-without-intent.png)

4. Verify that an ACL for this client was configured on the Kafka broker:
```bash

> kubectl logs -n kafka statefulset/kafka | grep "Processing Acl change" | grep mytopic | tail -n 1

Reviewer 2: This output is wrong - it shows the DENY ANONYMOUS ACL from the clientIdentityRequired: true setting, and not the intents. Also, since we are in shadow mode, it should not be happening at all, and was in fact a bug we fixed!

Since we are in shadow mode, the user should not be seeing anything.

We can see what happened:
1. Kafka topic-specific intents from **[client]** are declared (solid green line).
2. Calls from **[client-other]** are not declared (orange line).
3. Looking at the Kafka service, we can see that **[client]** has specific access configured (via Kafka ACLs) to perform `all` operations on the `mytopic` topic.

Since discovered intents from the network mapper don't specify what specific topics and operations clients are performing (or attempting to perform), the access graph cannot show information on what is being blocked vs allowed (red vs green). That feature is in development.

Also, the access graph shows information about the mTLS certificates (credentials) distributed to the various services, as long as [Cloud-managed credentials](/security#cryptographic-credentials) are being used. Visibility for certificates distributed through an in-cluster SPIRE is in development.

## Turn on protection

At this point, we haven't actually protected our Kafka broker. From everything we've done so far, we can see, however, that if we were to turn on protection, the `client-other` and `client-authenticated` would lose access to the broker.

> Let's see that in action. This only requires a single change to our helm chart's `values.yaml` file to set `allowEveryoneIfNoAclFound: false` which will set a `DEFAULT: deny` ACL. Our clients that have not declared intents will be blocked from accessing the broker.

Reviewer 2: This is a Kafka setting, it does not affect which ACLs are set by the intents-operator. If you turn this off, all access to other topics will be blocked.
I think that you can keep this on and the result will be that the tutorial works as described, since there will be an ACL on only these topics, meaning all other access is blocked.

Reviewer 2: To protect our Kafka broker, we should choose: either we use global shadow mode, or we flip `intentsRequired` to `true`, where the broker starts out with enforcement on.

Reviewer 2: @davidgs We changed this to work with allowEveryoneIfNoAclFound, so this change is no longer made.

* Add the TLS certificates of the Otterize credentials operator.
* Set the default ACL for all topics to allow anonymous access.

> ### Per-client setups

Reviewer 2: Can't leave a comment on the right line, but I meant to comment on the 'Bonus tutorial' below: I guess this is why client-other is there. I suggest we still remove it to simplify.
